Add blog 2024-01-17 (#162)
nextflow-io/website: content/blog/2024/optimizing-nextflow-for-hpc-and-cloud-at-scale.md

title=Optimizing Nextflow for HPC and Cloud at Scale
date=2024-01-17
type=post
description=There are several considerations when running large pipelines, including head job resources, storage, and virtual threads. In this in-depth article, Ben Sherman of @SeqeraLabs explains how to optimize #Nextflow for #HPC and cloud at scale! 
image=img/blog-2024-01-17--share.jpg
tags=nextflow,hpc,cloud
status=published
author=Ben Sherman
icon=ben.jpg
~~~~~~

## Introduction

A Nextflow workflow run consists of the head job (Nextflow itself) and compute tasks (defined in the pipeline script). It is common to request resources for the tasks via process directives such as `cpus` and `memory`, but the Nextflow head job also requires compute resources. Most of the time, users don’t need to explicitly define the head job resources, as Nextflow generally does a good job of allocating resources for itself. For very large workloads, however, head job resource sizing becomes much more important.

> In this article, we will help you understand how the Nextflow head job works and show you how to tune head job resources such as CPUs and memory for your use case.
> 
> ## Head job resources

Reviewer: Good place to truncate the intro blurb on the listing page here..

```suggestion
In this article, we will help you understand how the Nextflow head job works and show you how to tune head job resources such as CPUs and memory for your use case.

<!-- end-archive-description -->

## Head job resources
```

### CPUs

> Nextflow uses a thread pool to run native Groovy code (e.g. channel operators, `exec` processes), submit tasks to executors, and publish output files. The number of threads is based on the number of available CPUs, so if you want to provide more compute power to the head job, simply allocate more CPUs and Nextflow will use them. In Nextflow Tower, you can use **Head Job CPUs** or **Head Job submit options** (depending on the compute environment) to allocate more CPUs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nextflow uses a thread pool to run native Groovy code (e.g. channel operators, `exec` processes), submit tasks to executors, and publish output files. The number of threads is based on the number of available CPUs, so if you want to provide more compute power to the head job, simply allocate more CPUs and Nextflow will use them. In the Seqera Platform, you can use **Head Job CPUs** or **Head Job submit options** (depending on the compute environment) to allocate more CPUs.
```

</table>

As you can see, the benefit here is not so clear. Whereas the upload benchmark was almost entirely I/O, a typical Nextflow pipeline spends most of its time scheduling compute tasks and waiting for them to finish. These tasks are generally not I/O bound and do not block for very long, so there may be little opportunity for improvement from virtual threads.

That being said, this benchmark consisted of only two runs of nf-core/rnaseq. We didn’t perform more runs here because they were so large, so your results may vary. In particular, if your Nextflow runs spend a lot of time publishing outputs after all the compute tasks have completed, you will likely benefit the most from using virtual threads. In any case, virtual threads should perform at least as well as platform threads, albeit with higher memory usage in some cases.

## Summary

The key to right-sizing the Nextflow head job is to understand which parts of a Nextflow pipeline are executed directly by Nextflow, and which parts are delegated to compute tasks. This knowledge will help prevent head job failures at scale.

Here are the main takeaways:

- Nextflow uses a thread pool based on the number of available CPUs.

> - Nextflow uses a maximum heap size based on the standard JVM options, which is typically 25% of physical memory (75% in Tower).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Nextflow uses a maximum heap size based on the standard JVM options, which is typically 25% of physical memory (75% in the Seqera Platform).
```
